Cloud Cybersecurity Controls
(CCC – 2: 2024)



Document Classification: Public

Disclaimer: Please refer to the National Cybersecurity Authority’s website (https://nca.gov.sa),
to obtain the latest version of this document.

In the Name of Allah,
 The Most Gracious,
 The Most Merciful

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Disclaimer: The following controls will be governed by and
implemented in accordance with the laws of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and must be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the
courts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Therefore, the Arabic
version will be the binding language for all matters relating to the
meaning or interpretation of this document.

Document classification: Public

1



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Traffic Light Protocol (TLP):

This marking protocol is widely used around the world to share sensitive data. It has four
colors (traffic lights):

Red – Personal, Confidential, and for the Intended Recipient only

The recipient has no rights to share information classified in red with any person outside
the defined range of recipients, either inside or outside the entity.

Amber – Restricted Sharing

The recipient may share information classified in amber only with intended recipients
inside the entity and with recipients who are required to take action related to the shared
information.

Green – Sharing within the Same Community
The recipient may share information classified in green with other recipients inside the
entity or outside it within the same sector or related to the entity. However, it is not
allowed to exchange or publish this information on public channels.

White – No Restrictions

Document classification: Public

2



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Update and Review

NCA will periodically review and update the CCC as per the cybersecurity requirements and
related industry updates. NCA will communicate and publish the updated version of CCC for
implementation and compliance. NCA has updated the previous version of the CCC
(i.e., CCC-1:2020).

Version

CCC – 1
CCC – 2

Year of Issuance

Updates

2020
2024

Appendix (D) illustrates the updates on the previous version

Document classification: Public

3



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Table of Contents

Update and Review ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3

Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6

Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................. 7

Objectives ................................................................................................................................................................ 8

Scope of Work and Applicability ........................................................................................................................... 9

CCC Scope of Work ................................................................................................................................................. 9

Examples of CSPs outside Scope of Work ........................................................................................................... 9

CCC Statement of Applicability .............................................................................................................................. 9

Implementation and Compliance ........................................................................................................................ 10

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls Domains and Structure ........................................................................................................ 11

Main Domains and Subdomains .......................................................................................................................... 11

Structure ................................................................................................................................................................ 12

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls Documentation ................................................................................................... 13

Cybersecurity Governance ................................................................................................................................................................ 14

Cybersecurity Defense ........................................................................................................................................................................ 17

Cybersecurity Resilience .................................................................................................................................................................... 27

Third-Party Cybersecurity ................................................................................................................................................................. 28

Annexes ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 29

Annex No. (A): Cloud Cybersecurity Controls Levels ........................................................................................ 29

Annex No. (B): Terminologies and Definitions ................................................................................................... 34

Annex No. (C): List of the Abbreviations ............................................................................................................. 42

Annex No. (D): List of the Updates....................................................................................................................... 43

Document classification: Public

4



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

List of Figures and Illustrations

Figure 1: Cloud Cybersecurity Controls Components………………………………………………………………………………7

Figure 2: CCC Main Domains and Subdomains………………………………………………………………………………………11

Figure 3: CCC Identification Notation……………………………………………………………………………………………………12

Figure 4: Controls Unique Identifier Structure………………………………………………………………………………………12

List of Tables

Table 1. CCC Structure………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..13

Table 2. CSP’s commitments to cybersecurity controls for cloud computing………………………………………..29

Table 3. CST’s commitments to cybersecurity controls for cloud computing………………………………………..32

Table 4. Terms and Definitions……………………………………………………………………………………………………………34

Table 5. List of Abbreviations……………………………………………………………………………………………………………..42

Table 6. List of Updates………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………43

Document classification: Public

5



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Executive Summary

NCA’s mandates and duties fulfill the regulatory cybersecurity needs related to the
development of cybersecurity national policies, governance mechanisms, frameworks,
standards, controls, and guidelines, to support the important role of cybersecurity which has
increased with the rise of security risks in cyberspace more than any time before.

The cloud services subject is trending globally, while enjoying a very fast pace in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia which results in new cybersecurity risks that require cybersecurity
controls to transact with cloud services taking into consideration international common
practices in this field, thus supporting the already published Essential Cybersecurity Controls
(ECC-1: 2018).

As a result, the Cloud Cybersecurity Controls (CCC – 1: 2020) is developed to minimize
the cybersecurity risks of Cloud Service Providers (CSPs), and Cloud Customers, also known as
Cloud Service Tenants (CSTs). This document highlights the details of the cloud cybersecurity
controls for cloud services, objectives, scope, statement of applicability, compliance approach
and monitoring.

All CSPs and CSTs shall implement all necessary measures to ensure continuous
compliance with the CCC as per Article 10(3) of NCA’s mandate and as per the Royal Decree
number 57231, dated 10/11/1439 H.

Document classification: Public

6



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Introduction

The National Cybersecurity Authority (referred to in this document as “NCA”) updating the
Cloud Cybersecurity Controls (CCC – 2: 2024) after conducting a comprehensive study of
multiple national and international cybersecurity frameworks, standards, and controls, and
reviewing common industry practices and experiences in the field of cybersecurity. A mapping
study is conducted with international cloud computing standards and controls such as US
FedRAMP, Multi-Tier Cloud Security Standard for Singapore (MTCS SS), Germany C5, Cloud
Controls Matrix (CCM), and ISO/IEC 27001.

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls Components

The cloud cybersecurity controls consist of the following:

For CSPs

For CSTs

4 Main Domains

24 Subdomains

37 Main Controls

18 Main Controls

94 Subcontrols

26 Subcontrols

FIGURE 1: CLOUD CYBERSECURITY CONTROLS COMPONENTS

Document classification: Public

7



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Objectives

The Cloud Cybersecurity Controls (CCC – 2: 2024) is developed as an extension to the ECC. It
aims to achieve higher levels of national cybersecurity goals by focusing on cloud computing
services from the perspective of Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) and Cloud Service Tenants
(CSTs). Also, the CCC aims to set the minimum requirements for cybersecurity of cloud
computing, for both CSPs and CSTs, to contribute to enable the CSPs and the CSTs to provide
and use secure cloud computing services and mitigating cyber risks against them.

The cybersecurity of cloud computing services, for both CSPs and CSTs, must be able
to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the data and information within the
cloud environment. To that aim, CCC take into consideration the following four main
cybersecurity pillars:

 Strategy
 People
 Procedures
 Technology

Document classification: Public

8



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Scope of Work and Applicability

CCC Scope of Work

The cloud cybersecurity controls shall apply to the CSPs and CSTs. These controls

represent the minimum cybersecurity requirements for cloud computing.

CSPs within the scope of CCC are any CSP which provides cloud computing services to
the CSTs within the scope of work. CSTs within the scope of CCC are any government agency
in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia inside or outside the Kingdom including ministries, authorities,
establishments and other entities and their companies and sub-entities, as well as all private
sector entities owning, operating or hosting Critical National Infrastructures (CNIs) that
currently use or are planning to use any cloud service.

The cybersecurity controls shall apply to the CSPs and CSTs. These controls represent the

minimum cybersecurity requirements for cloud computing.

NCA strongly encourages all other entities in the Kingdom to leverage these controls to

implement best practices to improve and enhance their cloud cybersecurity.

Examples of CSPs outside Scope of Work

 CSPs who provide cloud computing services for non-Saudi entities outside the Kingdom

and do not provide services to CSTs within scope of work.

 CSPs who provide cloud computing services for individuals, and private sector entities
not owning, operating, or hosting Critical National Infrastructures (CNIs), and do not
provide services to CSTs within scope of work.

CCC Statement of Applicability

The ECC and the CCC have been developed after taking into consideration the
cybersecurity needs of CSPs and CSTs, and every CSP and CST must comply with all applicable
controls.

Document classification: Public

9



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Implementation and Compliance

To comply with Article 10(3) of NCA’s mandate and as per the Royal Decree number 57231, all
CSPs and CSTs within the scope of these controls must implement whatever necessary to
ensure continuous compliance with the CCC according to the levels shown in Table (2) and
Table (3) in section “Annex No. (A): Cloud Cybersecurity Controls Levels” in this document,
taking into account the following two rules:
1. CST’s controls in the CCC are an extension and complement to the controls in the ECC.
Therefore, the CSTs must ensure continuous compliance with the controls in both ECC and
CCC.

2. CSP’s controls in the CCC are an extension and complement to the controls in the ECC.
Therefore, the CSPs – within or outside the scope of the ECC- must ensure continuous
compliance with the controls in both ECC and CCC.

NCA evaluates entities’ compliance with the CCC through multiple means such as self-

assessments by the entities, periodic reports of the compliance tool or on-site audits.

Assessment and Compliance Tool

NCA will issue a tool (CCC-2: 2024 Assessment and Compliance Tool) to organize the

process of evaluation and compliance measurement against the CCC.

Document classification: Public

10



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls Domains and Structure

Main Domains and Subdomains

Figure (2) below shows the Main Domains and Subdomains of controls.

1- Cybersecurity
Governance

2- Cybersecurity
Defense

3- Cybersecurity
Resilience

4- Third-Party
Cybersecurity

1-1

1-3

1-5

2-1

2-3

2-5

2-7

2-9

2-11

2-13

2-15

2-17

3-1

4-1

Cybersecurity Roles and
Responsibilities

Compliance with
Cybersecurity Standards,
Laws, and Regulations

1-2

Cybersecurity Risk Management

1-4

Cybersecurity in Human
Resources

Cybersecurity in Change Management

Asset Management

2-2

Identity and Access Management

Information System and
Information Processing
Facilities Protection

2-4

Networks Security Management

Mobile Devices Security

2-6

Data and Information Protection

Cryptography

Vulnerabilities
Management

Cybersecurity Event Logs
and Monitoring
Management

Physical Security

Key Management

2-8

2-10

2-12

2-14

2-16

Backup and Recovery
Management

Penetration Testing

Cybersecurity Incident and
Threat Management

Web Application Security

System Development Security

Storage Media Security

Cybersecurity Resilience Aspects of Business Continuity Management
(BCM)

Supply Chain and Third-Party Cybersecurity

FIGURE 2: CCC MAIN DOMAINS AND SUBDOMAINS

Document classification: Public

11



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Structure

Figures (3) and (4) below show the meaning of controls codes.

CCC

2

2024

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Version No.

Year of Issuance

FIGURE 3: CCC IDENTIFICATION NOTATION

1

3
3

P/T
P/T

1
1

1
1

Main Domain

Subdomain

CSP/CST control

Main Control

Subcontrol

Figure 4: Controls Unique Identifier Structure

Document classification: Public

12



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

CSP and CST controls have common main domains and subdomains that are
differentiated on the third identification tier and have their own main control and subcontrol
identification notation sequences. CSPs will have an identification notation structure like ‘1-3-
P-1-1’ in the figure. CSTs will have an identification notation structure like ‘1-3-T-1-1’. CCC
uses the following:

● A control is either applicable to the Provider (P) or the Cloud Tenant (T),

indicated in the notation’s third tier (“P/T”).

● The green-colored numbers (such as: 1-3-2) are reference numbers to

subdomains or controls of ECC.

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls Documentation

Table (1) below shows the methodological structure of the controls.

Reference number of the Main Domain

Name of Main Domain

Reference number of the Subdomain

Name of Subdomain

Objective

Controls

Control Reference Number

Control clauses

Table 1. CCC Structure

Document classification: Public

13



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Details of Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Cybersecurity Governance

Cybersecurity Roles and Responsibilities

1-1
Objective To ensure that the roles and responsibilities are defined for all parties participating
in implementing the cloud cybersecurity controls, including the roles and
responsibilities of the head of the CSP and CST or his/her delegate, referred to in
these controls as the “Authorizing Official.”

Controls
1-1-P-1

1-1-T-1

In addition to the ECC control 1-4-1, the Authorizing Official shall also identify,
document, and approve:
1-1-P-1-1 Cybersecurity roles and RACI assignment for all stakeholders of the cloud

services including the Authorizing Official's roles and responsibilities.

In addition to the ECC control 1-4-1, the Authorizing Official shall also identify,
document, and approve:
1-1-T-1-1 Cybersecurity roles and RACI assignment for all stakeholders of the cloud

services including the Authorizing Official's roles and responsibilities.

1-2
Objective To ensure managing cybersecurity risks in a methodological approach in order to

Cybersecurity Risk Management

protect the CSP’s and CST’s information and technology assets as per entity-related
policies and procedures, and related laws and regulations.

Controls
1-2-P-1

Cybersecurity risk management methodology mentioned in the ECC Subdomain 1-5,
shall also include for the CSP, as a minimum:
1-2-P-1-1 Defining acceptable risk levels for the cloud services and clarifying them

to the CST if they are related to the CST.

1-2-P-1-2 Considering data and information classification in cybersecurity risk

management methodology.

1-2-P-1-3 Developing cybersecurity risk register for cloud services and monitoring

it periodically according to the risks.

1-2-T-1

Cybersecurity risk management methodology mentioned in the ECC Subdomain 1-5
shall also include for the CST, as a minimum:
1-2-T-1-1 Defining acceptable risk levels for the cloud services.

1-2-T-1-2 Considering data and information classification accredited by CST in

cybersecurity risk management methodology.

1-2-T-1-3 Developing cybersecurity risk register for cloud services and monitoring

it periodically according to the risks.

Document classification: Public

14



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Compliance with Cybersecurity Standards, Laws, and Regulations
1-3
Objective To ensure that the CSPs’ and CSTs’ cybersecurity program is in compliance with

related laws and regulations.

Controls

1-3-P-1

1-3-T-1

In addition to the ECC control 1-7-1, the CSP legislative and regulatory compliance
should include as a minimum with the following requirements:
1-3-P-1-1 Continuous compliance with all laws, regulations, instructions,

decisions, regulatory frameworks and controls, and mandates regarding
cybersecurity in the Kingdom

In addition to the ECC control 1-7-1, the CST legislative and regulatory compliance
should include as a minimum with the following requirements:
1-3-T-1-1 Continuous or real-time compliance monitoring of the CSP with
relevant cybersecurity legislation and contract clauses.

Cybersecurity in Human Resources

1-4
Objective To ensure that cybersecurity risks and requirements related to personnel (employees
and contractors) are managed efficiently prior to employment, during employment
and after termination/separation as per entity-related policies and procedures, and
related laws and regulations.

Controls

1-4-P-1

1-4-P-2

1-4-T-1

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC controls 1-9-3 and 1-9-4, the following
requirements should be covered prior and during the professional relationship of
personnel with the CSP as a minimum:
1-4-P-1-1 Positions of cybersecurity functions in CSP’s data centers within the

Kingdom must be filled with qualified and suitable Saudi nationals.

1-4-P-1-2 Screening or vetting candidates of personnel working inside the Kingdom
who have access to Cloud Technology Stack, periodically.
1-4-P-1-3 Cybersecurity policies as a prerequisite to access to Cloud Technology

Stack, signed and appropriately approved.

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 1-9-5, the following requirements
should be in place, as a minimum, for the termination/completion of a human
resource’s professional relationship with the CSP:

1-4-P-2-1 Assurance that assets owned by the entity (especially those with security
exposure) are accounted for and returned upon termination.

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 1-9-3, the following requirements
should be covered prior the professional relationship of staff with the CST
shall cover, at a minimum:

1-4-T-1-1 Screening or vetting candidates of personnel with access to Cloud Service
sensitive functions (Key Management, Service Administration, Access
Control).

Document classification: Public

15



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Cybersecurity in Change Management

1-5
Objective To ensure that cybersecurity requirements are included in change management
methodology and procedures in order to protect the confidentiality, integrity and
availability of information and technology assets as per CSPs policies and procedures,
and related laws and regulations.

Controls
1-5-P-1

1-5-P-2
1-5-P-3

Cybersecurity requirements for change management within the CSP shall be
identified, documented, and approved.
Cybersecurity requirements for change management within the CSP shall be applied

Cybersecurity for change management in the CSP shall cover, as a minimum:

1-5-P-3-1 Processes and procedures to securely implement changes (planned works)
in production systems, with priority given to cybersecurity observations.
1-5-P-3-2 Process for the implementation of cybersecurity exceptional changes (e.g.:

changes during incident restoration).

1-5-P-4

Cybersecurity requirements for change management within the CSP shall be applied
and reviewed periodically.

Document classification: Public

16



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Cybersecurity Defense

2-1
Objective To ensure that the CSP and CST has an accurate and detailed inventory of

Asset Management

information and technology assets in order to support the entity cybersecurity and
operational requirements to maintain the confidentiality, integrity and availability of
information and technology assets.

Controls
2-1-P-1

In addition to controls in the ECC control 2-1, the CSP shall cover the following
additional controls for cybersecurity requirements for cybersecurity event logs and
monitoring management, as a minimum:
2-1-P-1-1

Inventory of all information and technology assets using suitable
techniques such as Configuration Management Database (CMDB) or
similar capability containing an inventory of all technical assets.
Identifying assets owners and involving them in the asset management
lifecycle.

2-1-P-1-2

2-1-T-1

In addition to controls in the ECC control 2-1, the CST shall cover the following
additional controls for cybersecurity requirements for cybersecurity event logs and
monitoring management, as a minimum:
2-1-T-1-1

Inventory of all cloud services and information and technology assets
related to the cloud services.

Identity and Access Management

2-2
Objective To ensure the secure and restricted logical access to information and technology assets
in order to prevent unauthorized access and allow only authorized access for users
which are necessary to accomplish assigned tasks.

Controls
2-2-P-1

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-2-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional Subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for identity and access
management requirements, as a minimum:
2-2-P-1-1

Identity and access management of generic accounts credentials for
accountability cannot be assigned for a specific individual.
Secure session management, including session authenticity, session
lockout, and session timeout termination.

2-2-P-1-2

2-2-P-1-3 Multi-factor authentication for privileged users, and candidates of

2-2-P-1-4

2-2-P-1-5

personnel with access to Cloud Technology Stack.
Formal process to detect and prevent unauthorized access (e.g.,
unsuccessful login attempt threshold).
Utilizing secure methods and algorithms for saving and processing
passwords, such as: Secure Hashing functions.

Document classification: Public

17



2-2-T-1

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

2-2-P-1-6
2-2-P-1-7

Secure management of third- party personnel’s accounts.
Access control enforced to management systems, administrative
consoles.

2-2-P-1-8 Masking of displayed authentication inputs, especially passwords, to

2-2-P-1-9

prevent shoulder surfing.
Getting CST’s approval before accessing any CST-related asset by the
CSP or CSP’s third parties.

2-2-P-1-10 Capability to immediately interrupt a remote access session and prevent

2-2-P-1-11

any future access for a user.
Provision to CSTs of multi-factor authentication services for privileged
cloud users.

2-2-P-1-12 Assurance of restricted and controlled access to storage systems and

means (such as Storage Area Network (SAN)).

2-2-T-1-2

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-2-3, the CST shall cover the following
additional Subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for identity and access
management requirements, as a minimum:
2-2-T-1-1

Identity and access management for all cloud credentials along their full
lifecycle.
Confidentiality of cloud user identification, cloud credential and cloud
access rights information, including the requirement on users to keep
them private (for employed, third party and CST personnel).
Secure session management, including session authenticity, session
lockout, and session timeout termination on the cloud.
2-2-T-1-4 Multi-factor authentication for privileged cloud users.
2-2-T-1-5

2-2-T-1-3

Formal process to detect and prevent unauthorized access to cloud (such
as a threshold of unsuccessful login attempts).
2-3
Information System and Information Processing Facilities Protection
Objective To ensure the protection of information systems and information processing facilities

Controls
2-3-P-1

(including workstations and infrastructures) against cyber risks.

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-3-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional Subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for information system and
processing facilities protection requirements, as a minimum:
2-3-P-1-1

Ensuring that all configurations are applied in accordance with CSP’s
cybersecurity standards.
Assurance of separation and isolation of data, environments, and
information systems across CSTs, to prevent data commingling.
Adopting cybersecurity principles for technical system configurations
adhering to the minimum functionality principle.
Ability of the Cloud Technology Stacks to securely handle input
validation, exceptions and failure.

2-3-P-1-2

2-3-P-1-3

2-3-P-1-4

Document classification: Public

18



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

2-3-P-1-5

2-3-P-1-6

2-3-P-1-7

2-3-P-1-8
2-3-P-1-9

Full isolation of security functions and applications from other
functions and applications in the Cloud Technology Stack.
 Notification to CSTs with cybersecurity requirements provided by the
CSP that are useable by the CST.
Detection and prevention of unauthorized changes to software
programs, and systems.
Complete isolation and protection of multiple guest environments.
The community cloud services provided to CSTs (government entities
and CNI entities) shall be isolated from any other cloud computing
provided to entities outside the scope of work.

2-3-P-1-10 Modern technologies, such as Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR)
technologies, to ensure that the information servers and devices of CSP’s
information processing systems and devices of are ready for rapid
response to incidents.

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-3-3, the CST shall cover the following
additional Subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for information system and
processing facilities protection requirements, as a minimum:
2-3-T-1-1

Verifying that the CSP isolates the community cloud services provided
to CSTs (government entities and CNI entities) from any other cloud
computing provided to entities outside the scope of work.

2-3-T-1

Networks Security Management

2-4
Objective To ensure the protection of CSP’s and CST’s network from cyber risks.
Controls
2-4-P-1

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-5-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional Subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for networks security
management requirements, as a minimum:
2-4-P-1-1 Monitoring of traffic across the external and internal networks to detect

2-4-P-1-2

2-4-P-1-3

2-4-P-1-4

2-4-P-1-5
2-4-P-1-6

anomalies.
Network isolation and protection of Cloud Technology Stack network
from other internal and external networks.
Protection from denial-of-service attacks (including Distributed Denial
of Service (DDoS)).
Protection of data transmitted through the network; from and to the
Cloud Technology Stack network using cryptography primitives; for
management and administrative access.
Access control between different network segments.
 Isolation between cloud service delivery network, cloud management
network and CSP enterprise network.

Document classification: Public

19



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

2-4-T-1

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-5-3, the CST shall cover the following
additional Subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for networks security
management requirements, as a minimum:
2-4-T-1-1
Mobile Devices Security

Protecting the connection channel with CSP.

2-5
Objective To ensure the protection of mobile devices (including laptops, smartphones, and
tablets) from cyber risks and to ensure the secure handling of the CSPs’ and CSTs’
information (including sensitive information) while utilizing mobile devices.

Controls
2-5-P-1

2-5-T-1

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-6-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional Subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for mobile device security, as a
minimum:
2-5-P-1-1
2-5-P-1-2
2-5-P-1-3
2-5-P-1-4

Inventory of all end user and mobile devices.
Centralized mobile device security management.
Screen looking for end user devices.
Data sanitation and secure disposal for end-user devices, especially for
those with exposure to the Cloud Technology Stack.

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-6-3, the CST shall cover the following
additional Subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for mobile device security, as a
minimum:
2-5-T-1-1

Data sanitation and secure disposal for end-user devices with access to
the cloud services.

Data and Information Protection

2-6
Objective To ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of CSPs’ and CSTs’ data and

information as per entity-related policies and procedures, and related laws and
regulations.

Controls
2-6-P-1

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-7-3, the CSP shall cover the
following additional Subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for data and
information protection requirements, as a minimum:
2-6-P-1-1

Prohibiting the use of Cloud Technology Stack’s data in any
environment other than production environment, except after applying
strict controls for protecting that data, such as data masking or data
scrambling techniques.
Provision to CSTs of securely data storage processes, procedures, and
technologies to comply with related legal and regulatory requirements.
Disposal of CST’s data should be performed in a secure manner on
termination or expiry of the contract with the CSP.
Commitment to maintain the confidentiality of the CST’s data and
information, according to related legal and regulatory requirements.

2-6-P-1-2

2-6-P-1-3

2-6-P-1-4

Document classification: Public

20



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

2-6-P-1-5

Providing CSTs with secure means to export and transfer data and
virtual infrastructure.

2-6-T-1

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-7-3, the CST shall cover the following
additional Subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for protecting CST’s data and
information in cloud computing, as a minimum:
2-6-T-1-1

Exit Strategy to ensure means for secure disposal of data on termination
or expiry of the contract with the CSP.
Using secure means to export and transfer data and virtual
infrastructure.

2-6-T-1-2

2-7
Objective To ensure the proper and efficient use of cryptography to protect information assets

Cryptography

as per policies, procedures, and related laws and regulations.

Controls
2-7-P-1

2-7-T-1

In addition to Subcontrols in the ECC control 2-8-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional Subcontrols for cryptography, as a minimum:
2-7-P-1-1

Technical mechanisms and cryptographic primitives for strong
encryption, in according to the advanced level in the National
Cryptographic Standards (NCS-1:2020).
Certification authority and issuance capability in a secure manner, or
usage of certificates from a trusted certification authority.

2-7-P-1-2

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 2-8-3, the CST shall cover the
following additional subcontrols for cryptography, as a minimum:
2-7-T-1-1

Technical mechanisms and cryptographic primitives for strong
encryption, in according to the advanced level in the National
Cryptographic Standards (NCS-1:2020).
Encryption of data and information transferred to or transferred out of
the cloud according to the relevant law and regulatory requirements.

2-7-T-1-2

2-8

Backup and Recovery Management

Document classification: Public

21



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Objective To ensure the protection of CSPs’ data and information including information

systems and software configurations from cyber risks as per entity-related policies
and procedures, and related laws and regulations.

Controls
2-8-P-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 2-9-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for backup and recovery
management, as a minimum:
2-8-P-1-1

Securing access, storage and transfer of CST’s data backups and its
mediums, and protecting
it against damage, amendment, or
unauthorized access.
Securing access, storage and transfer of Cloud Technology Stack
backups and
it against damage,
amendment, or unauthorized access.

its mediums, and protecting

2-8-P-1-2

2-9
Objective To ensure timely detection and effective remediation of technical vulnerabilities to

Vulnerabilities Management

prevent or minimize the probability of exploiting these vulnerabilities to launch
cyber attacks against the CSP and CST.

Controls
2-9-P-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 2-10-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for vulnerability management
requirements, as a minimum:
2-9-P-1-1

Assessing and remediating vulnerabilities on external components of
Cloud Technology Stack at least once every month, and at least once
every three months for internal components of Cloud Technology Stack.
Notification to CSTs of identified vulnerabilities that may affecting
them, and safeguards in place.

2-9-P-1-2

2-9-T-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 2-10-3, the CST shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for vulnerability management
requirements, as a minimum:
2-9-T-1-1

Assessing and remediating vulnerabilities cloud services and at least
once every three months.

2-9-T-1-2 Management of CSP-notified vulnerabilities safeguards in place.

2-10

Penetration Testing

Document classification: Public

22



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Objective To assess and evaluate the efficiency of the CSP’s cybersecurity defense capabilities
through simulated cyber-attacks to discover unknown weaknesses within the technical
infrastructure that may lead to a cyber breach.

Controls
2-10-P-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 2-11-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for penetration testing, as a
minimum:
2-10-P-1-1

Scope of penetration tests must cover Cloud Technology Stack and must
be conducted at least once every six months.
Cybersecurity Event Logs and Monitoring Management

2-11
Objective Ensure timely collection, analysis, and monitoring of cybersecurity event logs for the
proactive detection and effective management of cyber-attacks to prevent or minimize
the impact on the CSPs’ and CSTs’ business.

Controls
2-11-P-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 2-12-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for cybersecurity event logs and
monitoring management, as a minimum:
2-11-P-1-1 Activating and protecting event logs and audit trails of Cloud

Technology Stack.

2-11-P-1-2 Activating and collecting login attempts history.
2-11-P-1-3 Activating and protecting all event logs of activities and operations
performed by the CSP at the tenant level in order to support forensic
analysis.
Protecting cybersecurity event
logs from alteration, disclosure,
destruction and unauthorized access and unauthorized release, in
accordance with regulatory, or law requirements.

2-11-P-1-4

2-11-P-1-5 Continuous cybersecurity events monitoring using SIEM technique

covering the full Cloud Technology Stack.

2-11-P-1-6 Reviewing cybersecurity event logs and audit trails periodically,

covering CSP events in the Cloud Technology Stack.

2-11-P-1-7 Automated monitoring and logging of remote access sessions event logs.
Secure handling of user-related data found in the audit trails and the
2-11-P-1-8
cybersecurity event logs.

2-11-T-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 2-12-3, the CST shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for cybersecurity event logs and
monitoring management, as a minimum:
2-11-T-1-1 Activating and collecting of login event logs, and cybersecurity event

logs on assets related to cloud services.

2-11-T-1-2 Monitoring shall include all activated cybersecurity logs on the cloud

services of the CST.

Document classification: Public

23



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Cybersecurity Incident and Threat Management

2-12
Objective Ensure timely identification and detection of cybersecurity incidents and their effective
management and proactive response to cybersecurity threats to prevent or minimize
the impact of the impacts resulting on the business of the CSPs.

Controls
2-12-P-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 2-13-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for cybersecurity incident and
threat management, as a minimum:
2-12-P-1-1

Subscribing in authorized and specialized entities and groups to stay up-
to-date on Cybersecurity threats, common practices, and key know-
how.

2-12-P-1-2 Training for employees and third-party personnel to respond to

cybersecurity incidents, in line with their roles and responsibilities.
Periodically testing the incident response capability.

2-12-P-1-3
2-12-P-1-4 Root Cause Analysis of cybersecurity incidents and developing plans to

2-12-P-1-5

address them.
Support the CST in cases legal proceedings and forensics, protecting the
chain of custody that falls under the management and responsibility of
the CSP,
law and regulatory
requirements.

in accordance with the related

2-12-P-1-6 Real-time reporting to the CST of incidents that may affect CST; if the

2-12-P-1-7

incident is discovered.
Support for CSTs to handle security incidents according to the
agreement between the CSP and CST.

2-12-P-1-8 Measuring and monitoring cybersecurity incident metrics and monitor
compliance with contracts and legislative requirements.

2-13
Objective To ensure the protection of CSPs’ information and technology assets from

Physical Security

unauthorized physical access, loss, theft, and damage.

Controls
2-13-P-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 2-14-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for physical security, as a
minimum:
2-13-P-1-1 Continual monitoring of access to CSP’s sites and buildings.
2-13-P-1-2

Preventing unauthorized access to devices in the Cloud Technology
Stack.

2-13-P-1-3 Disposal of cloud infrastructure hardware, in particular, storage
equipment (external or internal), by adopting relevant legislation and
best practices.

2-14
Objective Ensure the protection of external web applications of the CSP from cyber risks.

Web Application Security

Document classification: Public

24



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Controls
2-14-P-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 2-15-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for web application security, as
a minimum:
2-14-P-1-1

Protecting information involved in application service transactions
against possible risks (e.g.: incomplete transmission, mis-routing,
unauthorized message alteration, unauthorized disclosure….).

Key Management

2-15
Objective Ensure secure management of CSPs’ and CSTs’ cryptographic keys to protect
confidentiality, integrity and availability of information and technical assets.

Controls
2-15-P-1 Cybersecurity requirements for key management process within the CSP shall be

identified, documented, and approved.

2-15-P-2 Cybersecurity requirements for key management process within the CSP shall be

2-15-P-3

applied.
In addition to the ECC Subcontrol 2-8-3-2, cybersecurity requirements for key
management within the CSP shall cover, at minimum, the following:
2-15-P-3-1
Ensure well-defined ownership for cryptographic keys.
2-15-P-3-2 A secure cryptographic key retrieval mechanism

in case of
cryptographic key lost (such as backup of keys and enforcement of
trusted key storage, strictly external to cloud).

2-15-P-3-3 Activating and monitoring of all audit trails of keys.

2-15-P-4 Cybersecurity requirements for key management within the CSP shall be applied and

reviewed periodically.

2-15-T-1 Cybersecurity requirements for key management within the CST shall be identified,

documented, and approved.

2-15-T-2 Cybersecurity requirements for key management within the CST shall applied.
2-15-T-3

In addition to the ECC Subcontrol 2-8-3-2, cybersecurity requirements for key
management within the CST shall cover, at minimum, the following:
2-15-T-3-1 Ensure well-defined ownership for cryptographic keys.
2-15-T-3-2 A secure data retrieval mechanism in case of cryptographic encryption
key lost (such as backup of keys and enforcement of trusted key storage,
strictly external to cloud).

2-15-T-4 Cybersecurity requirements for key management within the CST shall be applied and

reviewed periodically.

2-16

System Development Security

Document classification: Public

25



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Objective Ensure CSPs’ systems are developed, integrated, and deployed in a secure manner.
Controls
2-16-P-1 Cybersecurity requirements for system development within the CSP shall be identified,

documented, and approved.

2-16-P-2 Cybersecurity requirements for system development within the CSP shall be applied.
2-16-P-3 Cybersecurity requirements for system development within the CSP shall include as a

minimum the following controls along the development lifecycle:
2-16-P-3-1 Considering cybersecurity requirements of the Cloud Technology Stack
and relevant systems in the design and implementation of the cloud
computing services.
Protecting system development environments, testing environments
(including data used in testing environment), and integration platforms.
2-16-P-4 Cybersecurity requirements for system development within the CSP shall be applied

2-16-P-3-2

and reviewed periodically.
Storage Media Security

2-17
Objective Ensure CSPs’ secure handling of information and data on physical media.
Controls
2-17-P-1 Cybersecurity requirements for usage of information and data media within the CSP

shall be identified, documented, and approved.

2-17-P-2 Cybersecurity requirements for usage of information and data media within the CSP

shall be applied.

2-17-P-3 Cybersecurity requirements for usage of information and data media within the CSP

shall cover, at minimum, the following:
2-17-P-3-1
2-17-P-3-2 Using secure means when disposing of media.
2-17-P-3-3

Enforcement of sanitization of media, prior to disposal or reuse.

Provision to maintain confidentiality and integrity of data on removable
media.

2-17-P-3-4 Human readable labelling of media, to explain its classification and the

sensitivity of the information it contains.

2-17-P-3-5 Controlled and physically secure storage of removable media.
2-17-P-3-6 Restriction and control of usage of portable media inside the Cloud

Technology Stack.

2-17-P-4 Cybersecurity requirements for usage of information and data media within the CSP

shall be applied and reviewed periodically.

Document classification: Public

26



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Cybersecurity Resilience

3-1
Objective To ensure the inclusion of the cybersecurity resiliency requirements within the CSPs’

Cybersecurity Resilience Aspects of Business Continuity Management (BCM)

and CSTs’ business continuity management and to remediate and minimize the
impacts on systems, information processing facilities and critical e-services from
disasters caused by cybersecurity incidents.

Controls
3-1-P-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 3-1-3, the CSP shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for cybersecurity resilience
aspects of business continuity management, as a minimum:
3-1-P-1-1

Developing and implementing disaster recovery and business continuity
procedures in a secure manner.
Developing and implementing procedures to ensure resilience and
continuity of cybersecurity systems dedicated to the protection of Cloud
Technology Stack.

3-1-P-1-2

3-1-T-1

In addition to subcontrols in the ECC control 3-1-3, the CST shall cover the following
additional subcontrols for cybersecurity requirements for cybersecurity resilience
aspects of business continuity management, as a minimum:
3-1-T-1-1

Developing and implementing disaster recovery and business continuity
procedures related to cloud computing, in a secure manner.

Document classification: Public

27



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Third-Party Cybersecurity

4-1

Supply Chain and Third-Party Cybersecurity

Objective To ensure the protection of assets against the cybersecurity risks related to third-

parties including outsourcing and managed services as per policies and procedures,
and related laws and regulations.

Controls
4-1-P-1

In addition to implementing the ECC controls 4-1-2 and 4-1-3, the CSP shall cover
the following additional subcontrols for third-party cybersecurity requirements, as a
minimum:
4-1-P-1-1

Ensure that the CSP fulfills NCA's requests to remove software or
services, provided by third-party providers that may be considered a
cybersecurity threat to national entities, from the marketplace provided
to CSTs.
Requirement to provide security documentation for any equipment or
services from suppliers and third-party providers.
Third-party providers compliant with law and regulatory requirements
relevant to their scope.
Risk management and security governance on third-party providers as
part of general cybersecurity risk management and governance.

4-1-P-1-2

4-1-P-1-3

4-1-P-1-4

Document classification: Public

28



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Annexes

Annex No. (A): Cloud Cybersecurity Controls Levels

Cybersecurity controls for cloud services are divided into four levels using a top-down approach,
level 1, level 2, level 3, and level 4:

 Level 1: A classification level applies to data classified as a (top secret) based on what is issued

by the competent authority.

 Level 2: A classification level applies to data classified as a (secret) based on what is issued by

the competent authority.

 Level 3: A classification level applies to data classified as a (confidential) based on what is issued

by the competent authority.

 Level 4: classification level applies to data classified as a (public) based on what is issued by the

competent authority.

Please note that the highest level of classification should be adopted when the content of an integrated
set of data includes different levels.

CSP Controls:
Table (2) below shows CSP’s commitments to cloud cybersecurity controls (section no. 10 "Cloud
Cybersecurity Controls") by levels.

Table 2. CSP’s commitments to cybersecurity controls for cloud computing

❖ Optional (Recommended)

✔ Mandatory

Subdomains and
Controls

ECC Controls

1-1-P-1

1-2-P-1

1-3-P-1

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

✔

✔

✔

✔

 ✔

 ✔

✔

✔

29

 ✔

 ✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

❖



Document classification: Public

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Subdomains and
Controls

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

1-4-P-1

1-4-P-2

1-5-P

2-1-P-1

2-2-P-1

2-3-P-1

2-4-P-1

2-5-P-1

2-6-P-1

2-7-P-1

2-8-P-1

2-9-P-1

2-10-P-1

2-11-P-1

2-12-P-1

2-13-P-1

2-14-P-1

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔3

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

❖

❖

✔

✔

✔1

✔2

✔

✔4

✔

✔5

✔

✔

✔

❖

✔6

✔

✔

1 With exception of subcontrols 2-2-P-1-9 and 2-2-P-1-10 as they are considered as optional
2 With exception of subcontrols 2-3-P-1-4 as it is considered as optional. Also, subcontrol 2-3-P-1-9 as it is not applicable
3 With exception of subcontrol 2-5-P-1-2 as it is considered as optional
4 With exception of subcontrol 2-7-P-1-1 as it is considered as optional
5 With exception of subcontrols 2-12-P-1-2, 2-12-P-1-3, and 2-12-P-1-8 as they are considered as optional

Document classification: Public

30



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Subdomains and
Controls

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

2-15-P

2-16-P

2-17-P

3-1-P-1

4-1-P-1

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔7

✔

✔

✔

✔8

6 With exception of subcontrol 2-15-P-3-1 as it is considered as optional
7 With exception of Subcontrol 4-1-P-1-1 as it is considered as optional

Document classification: Public

31



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

- CST Controls:
Table (3) below shows CST’s commitments to cloud cybersecurity controls (section no. 10 "Cloud
Cybersecurity Controls") by levels.

Table 3. CST’s commitments to cybersecurity controls for cloud computing

❖ Optional (Recommended)

✔ Mandatory

Subdomains and
Controls

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

1-1-T-1

1-2-T-1

1-3-T-1

1-4-T-1

2-1-T-1

2-2-T-1

2-3-T-1

2-4-T-1

2-5-T-1

2-6-T-1

2-7-T-1

2-9-T-1

2-11-T-1

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

 ✔

✔

✔

 ✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

 ✔

 ✔

 ✔

 ✔

✔

✔

 ✔

 ✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

 ✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

 ✔

 ✔

✔

✔

 ✔

✔

✔

✔

❖

✔

✔

✔9

 ✔

❖

❖

✔10

 ✔

❖

9 With exception of subcontrol 2-3-T-1-1 as it is not applicable
10 With exception of subcontrol 2-7-T-1-1 as it is considered as optional

Document classification: Public

32



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Subdomains and
Controls

2-15-T

3-1-T-1

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

✔

 ✔

✔

 ✔

✔

 ✔

✔

✔

Document classification: Public

33



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Annex No. (B): Terminologies and Definitions

Annex B below shows some of the terminologies contained herein, and the meanings ascribed thereto.
Table 4. Terms and Definitions

Terminology

Asset

Attack

Audit

Authentication

Authorization

Availability

Backup

Closed-Circuit
Television (CCTV)

Change Management

Classification

Definition
Anything tangible or intangible that has value to the CSPs and CSTs. There
are many types of assets, and some of which include obvious things, such
as: persons, machineries, utilities, patents, software, and services. The term
could also include less obvious things, such as: information and
characteristics (for example, CSPs’ and CSTs’ reputation and public image,
as well as skill and knowledge).
Any kind of malicious activity that attempts to achieve unauthorized
access, collection, disabling, prevention, destroy or sabotage of the
information system resources or the information itself.
Independent review and examination of records and activities in order to
assess the effectiveness of cybersecurity controls and to ensure adherence
to policies, operational procedures, standards, and relevant legislative and
regulatory requirements.
Ensure user's identity, process, or device, which is often a prerequisite for
allowing access to resources in the system.
Identification and verification of the rights/licenses of the user to access
and allow him/her to view the information and technical resources of the
CSPs and CSTs as defined in the rights/user licenses.
Ensure timely access to information, data, systems, and applications.
Files, devices, data, and procedures available for use in case of failure or
loss, or in case of deletion or suspension of their original copies.
CCTV, also known as video surveillance, uses video cameras to send a
signal to a specific location on a limited set of screens. This term is often
referred to as the surveillance technique in areas that may need to be
monitored where physical security is an important requirement thereto.
It is a service management system that ensures a systematic and proactive
approach using effective standard methods and procedures (for example,
change in infrastructure, networks, etc.). Change Management helps all
stakeholders, including individuals and teams alike, move from their
current state to the next desired state, and also helps reduce the impact of
relevant incidents on service.
Categorizing the data prepared, collected, processed, or exchanged by the
entities for the provision of services or conduct of businesses, including
data received from or exchanged with persons outside entities, and the data
that is prepared for the interest of entities or related to the sensitive

Document classification: Public

34



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Terminology

Classified Data

Cloud Computing

Cloud Computing
Compliance Control
Catalogue (C5)

Cloud Computing
Services

Cloud Controls
Matrix (CCM)

Cloud Customer

Cloud Service
Provider (CSP)

Configuration
Management
DataBase (CMDB)

services delivery

types of cloud computing

Cloud Software as a Service (SaaS).
Cloud Platform as a Service (PaaS).
Cloud Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS).

Definition
infrastructure. Data related to entities is classified, using a top-down
approach, level 1, level 2, level 3, or level 4.
Any data classified at any of the following levels: level 1, level 2, level 3, or
level 4.
Is a model which enables convenient, on-demand network access to a
shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers,
storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and
released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.
Cloud models are composed of five Essential Characteristics: On-demand
self-service, Broad network access, Resource pooling, Rapid elasticity, and
Measured service.
three
There are
models:
There are four deployment models: Private Cloud, Community Cloud,
Public Cloud, and Hybrid Cloud.
C5 is developed by the German Federal Office for Information Security
(BSI) to set minimum requirements to secure cloud services in order to
establish a framework of trust between cloud providers and their
customers.
Is the delivery of various services via the Internet and can be accessible
through different platforms (desktops, laptops, smart phones, etc.). These
services include applications and infrastructures such as servers, databases,
and networking to support, among other things, communication, data
analysis, processing, sharing and storage.
CCM is developed by the Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) to provide
fundamental security principles to help the CSTs assessing the security
risks of cloud services provided by the CSP.
In this document referred to as “Cloud Service Tenant (CST),” is any
natural or legal person (such as companies) who subscribes to the cloud
computing services provided by the service provider.
Any natural or legal person (such as companies) who provides cloud
computing services to the public, either directly or indirectly through data
centers (both inside and outside the Kingdom) and manages them in whole
or in part.
Configuration Management DataBase, concept defined originally by the
ITIL operations standard and consisting in database used to store
configuration records of systems throughout their Lifecycle.

Document classification: Public

35



Terminology

Cloud Technology
Stack (CTS)

Compromise

Confidentiality

Confidential
Data/Information

Critical National
Infrastructure (CNI)

Cryptography

Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Definition
Layered architecture of technologies that are essential to implement cloud
computing services: (Data Center infrastructure, LAN, storage/ compute/
hyper convergence hardware, hypervisor, cloud management platform,
virtual appliances, OSs, application software, O&M platforms, cloud
security technologies etc.…)
Disclosure of or obtaining information by unauthorized persons, which are
unauthorized to be leaked or obtained, or violation of the cybersecurity
policy of the Entity through disclosure, change, sabotage, or loss of
anything, either intentionally or unintentionally.
The expression "security violation" means disclosure of, obtaining, leaking,
altering or use of sensitive data without authorization (including
cryptographic keys and other critical cybersecurity standards).
Maintaining authorized restrictions on access to and disclosure of
information, including means of protecting privacy/personal information.
The information (or data) that is highly sensitive and important, according
to the classification of the CSPs and CSTs, intended for use by them. One
of the methods that can be used to classify this type of information is to
measure the extent of the damage when it is disclosed, accessed in an
unauthorized manner, damaged or sabotaged, as this may result in material
or moral damage to the CSPs and CSTs or its clients, affecting the lives of
persons related to that information or affecting and damaging the security
of the state or its national economy or national capabilities.
Sensitive information includes all information whose disclosure in
unauthorized manner, loss or sabotage results in accountability or
statutory penalties.
These are the assets (i.e., facilities, systems, networks, processes, and key
operators who operate and process them), whose loss or vulnerability to
security breaches may result in:

Significant negative impact on the availability, integration, or
delivery of basic services, including services that could result in serious loss
of property and/or lives and/or injuries, alongside observance of significant
economic and/or social impacts.

and/or state economy or national capacities.
These are the rules that include the principles, methods and means of
storing and transmitting data or information in a particular form in order
to conceal its semantic content, prevent unauthorized use or prevent
undetected modification so that only the persons concerned can read and
process the same.

Significant impact on national security and/or national defense

Document classification: Public

36



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Terminology

Cyber-Attack

Cyber Risks

Cybersecurity
Resilience

Cybersecurity

Cyberspace

Data

Data and
Information
Classification

Defense-in-Depth

Disaster Recovery

Effectiveness

Definition
Intentional exploitation of computer systems and networks, and those
CSPs and CSTs whose work depends on digital ICT, in order to cause
damage.
Risks that harm the CSPs’ and CSTs’ processes (including the CSPs’ and
CSTs’ vision, mission, management, image, or reputation), assets,
individuals, other entities, or the State due to unauthorized access, use,
disclosure, disruption, modification or destruction of information and/or
information systems.
Overall ability of the CSPs and CSTs to withstand cyber incidents and the
causes of damage, and recovery therefrom.
Pursuant to the provisions of NCA's Regulation issued by virtue of the
Royal Decree No. (6801) of (11/02/1439), cybersecurity is protection of
networks, IT systems, operational technologies systems and their
components of hardware and software, their services and the data they
contain, from any penetration, disruption, modification, access, use or
unauthorized exploitation. The concept of cybersecurity also includes
information security, digital security, etc.
The interconnected network of IT infrastructure, including the Internet,
communications networks, computer systems and Internet-connected
devices, as well as the associated hardware and control devices. The term
can also refer to a virtual world or domain such as a simple concept.
Any information, records, statistics, or documents that are photocopied,
recorded, and stored electronically.
Setting the sensitivity level of data and information that results in security
controls for each level of classification. Data and information sensitivity
levels are set according to predefined categories where data and
information is created, modified, improved, stored, or transmitted. The
classification level is an indication of the value or importance of the data
and information of the Entity.
This is a concept of information assurance where multiple levels of security
controls are used (as a defense) within the IT/OT system.
Programs and plans designed to restore the Entity’s critical business
functions and services to an acceptable situation, following exposure to
cyber-attacks or disruption of such services.
Effectiveness refers to the degree to which a planned impact is achieved.
Planned activities are considered effective if these activities are already
implemented, and the planned results are considered effective if the results
are already achieved. KPIs can be used to measure and evaluate the level of
effectiveness.

Document classification: Public

37



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Definition
Something that happens in a specific place (such as network, systems,
applications, etc.) at a specific time.
US Government assessment and authorization process for U.S. federal
agencies designed to ensure security is in place when accessing cloud
computing products and services. FedRAMP certifies cloud service
providers to handle data in one of three impact levels:
●
FedRAMP Low - loss of confidentiality, integrity, and availability
would result in limited adverse effects on an agency’s operations, assets, or
individuals.
●
FedRAMP Moderate - loss of confidentiality, integrity, and
availability would result in serious adverse effects on an agency’s
operations, assets, or individuals.
●
FedRAMP High - Law Enforcement and Emergency Services
systems, Financial systems, Health systems, and any other system where
loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability could be expected to have a
severe or catastrophic adverse effect on entity-related operations, entity-
related assets, or individuals.
A means for identification of the identity of the user, process, or device,
which is usually a prerequisite for granting access to resources in the
system.
A security breach through violation of cybersecurity policies, acceptable
use policies, practices or cybersecurity controls or requirements.
Protection against unauthorized modification or destruction of
information,
information non-repudiation and
reliability.
The international requirements are requirements developed by an
international entity or entity, which are highly-used in a statutory manner
all over the world (such as: PCI, SWIFT, etc.).

including ensuring

The national requirements are requirements developed by a regulatory
entity within the Kingdom for statutory use (such as: the "ECC – 1: 2018").

the

series developed by

International Organization

This
for
Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC) to provide best practice recommendations to establish, implement,
maintain, and continually improve information security management
system (ISMS).
A type of performance measurement tool that assesses the success of an
activity or entity towards achievement of specific objectives.

Terminology

Event

FedRAMP

Identification

Incident

Integrity

(Inter)National
Requirements

ISO/IEC 27000

Key Performance
Indicator (KPI)

Document classification: Public

38



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Terminology

Labelling

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

Multi-Factor
Authentication
(MFA)

Multi-Tier Cloud
Security Standard for
Singapore
 (MTCS SS)

Staff

Definition
Display of information (by specific and standard naming and coding) that
is placed on the CSPs’ and CSTs’ assets (such as devices, applications,
documents, etc.) to be used to refer to some information related to the
classification, ownership, type, and other asset management information.
A classification level applies to data classified as a (top secret) based on
what is issued by the competent entity.
A classification level applies to data classified as a (secret) based on what is
issued by the competent entity.
A classification level applies to data classified as a (confidential) based on
what is issued by the competent entity.
A classification level applies to data classified as a (public) based on what
is issued by the competent entity.
A security system that verifies user identity, which requires the use of
several separate elements of identity verification mechanisms. Verification
mechanisms include several elements:

Knowledge: (something ONLY the user knows "like password");

Possession: (something ONLY used by the user "such as a program
or device generating random numbers or SMSs for login records, which
are called: One-Time-Password); and

as fingerprint).
This standard aims to encourage the adoption of sound risk management
and security practices for cloud computing.
MTCS SS has three levels of security, Level 1 being the base and Level 3
being the most stringent:

Level 1 – Designed for non-business critical data and systems, with
baseline security controls to address security risks and threats in potentially
low impact information systems using cloud services.

Level 2 – Designed to address the need of most entities running
critical data and systems through a set of more stringent security controls.
These address security risks and threats in potentially moderate impact
information systems using cloud service.

for regulated entities with specific
Level 3 – Designed
requirements, which supplement or address security risks and threats in
high impact information systems using cloud services.
Persons working with CSPs or CSTs (including official and temporary staff
and contractors).

Inherent Characteristics: (a characteristic of the user ONLY, such

Document classification: Public

39



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Terminology

Outsourcing

Penetration Testing

Physical Security

Policy

Privileged Access
Management

Procedure

Process

RACI Matrix

Recovery

Security Information
and Event
Management (SIEM)

System Development
Security

Third-Party

Definition
Obtaining (goods or services) by contracting with a supplier or service
provider.
Testing a computer system, network, website application or smart phone
application to look for the vulnerabilities that the attacker can exploit.
Physical security describes security measures designed to prevent
unauthorized access to the entity’s facilities, equipment, and resources, and
to protect individuals and property from damage or harm (such as
espionage, theft, or terrorist attacks).
Physical security involves the use of multiple-tier of interconnected
systems, including CCTV, security guards, security limits, locks, access
control systems and many other technologies.
A document whose clauses specify a general obligation, direction or intent
as formally expressed by the Authorizing Official of the entity.
Cybersecurity Policy is a document whose clauses reflect official
commitment of the Senior Management to implement and improve the
cybersecurity program in the entity, which includes the objectives of the
CSPs and CSTs regarding the cybersecurity program, its controls and
requirements, and the mechanism for improving and developing the same.
The process of managing high-risk powers on entity’s systems, which often
require special treatment to minimize risks that may arise from misuse
thereof.
A document with a detailed description of the steps necessary to perform
specific operations or activities in compliance with relevant standards and
policies. Procedures are defined as part of operations.
A set of interrelated or interactive activities that translated input into
output. Such activities are influenced by the policies of the CSPs and CSTs.
Responsible, Accountable, Consulted, Informed Matrix. Matrix that maps
each player in a process, capability, or function with the degree of
involvement and responsibility undertaken in the process.
A procedure or process to restore or control something that is suspended,
damaged, stolen or lost.
A system that manages and analyses security events logs in real time in
order to provide monitoring of threats, analysis of the results of
interrelated rules for event logs and reports on logs data, and incident
response.
Any application, platform, middleware, operating system, hypervisor,
network stack and any other software that is part of the Cloud Technology
Stack.
Any entity acting as a party in a contractual relationship to provide goods
or services (this includes suppliers and service providers).

Document classification: Public

40



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Terminology

Threat

Vulnerability

Definition
Any circumstance or events likely to adversely affect the business of the
CSPs and CSTs (including its mission, functions, credibility or reputation),
assets or employees, through exploiting an information system through
unauthorized access to, destruction, disclosure, alteration or denial of
services, in addition to the ability of the threat source to succeed in
exploiting one of the vulnerabilities of a particular information system,
which includes cyber threats.
Any kind of vulnerability in the computer system, its programs, or
applications, in a set of procedures or anything that makes cybersecurity
vulnerable.

Document classification: Public

41



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Annex No. (C): List of the Abbreviations

Annex C below shows some of the abbreviations, and their meanings, used in the controls herein.

Abb.
BCM
CCC
CCTV
CMDB
CNI
CSP
CST
CTS
DDoS
ECC
IaaS
MFA
PaaS
SAN
SaaS
SIEM

Table 5. List of Abbreviations

Full Version
Business Continuity Management
Cloud Cybersecurity Controls
Closed-Circuit Television
Configuration Management DataBase
Critical National Infrastructure
Cloud Service Provider
Cloud Service Tenant
Cloud Technology Stack
Distributed Denial of Service
Essential Cybersecurity Controls
Infrastructure as a Service
Multi-Factor Authentication
Platform as a Service
Storage Area Network
Software as a Service
Security Information and Event Management

Document classification: Public

42



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Annex No. (D): List of the Updates

Annex D below shows the updates on the previous version (i.e., CCC-1:2020).

Table 6. List of Updates

Version

CCC – 2 : 2024

Date

2024

Update type

Section

Previous text

Updated text

Rationale

Deletion

Subcontrol
2-3-p-1-10

Deletion

Subcontrol
2-3-p-1-11

cloud
from within

computing
Provide
services
the
Kingdom, including systems
used for storage, processing,
and disaster recovery centers.

cloud
from within

computing
Provide
the
services
Kingdom, including systems
used
for monitoring, and
support.

Controls related to
data localization have
been transferred from
the document to the
National Data
Management Office
(NDMO) at the Saudi
Data and Artificial
Intelligence Authority
for as per the
mandates, and entities
must refer to the
National Data
Management Office
regarding data
localization before
taking any action in
this regard.

Modification Terminologies
and Definitions

Confidential
Data/Information

Sensitive Data/Information

Translation update

Document classification: Public

43



Cloud Cybersecurity Controls

Document classification: Public

44


